The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Mentor: Scotland, The Land of Song and
Scenery, Vol. 1, Num. 10, Serial No. 10, A, by Dwight L. Elmendorf

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.



Title: The Mentor: Scotland, The Land of Song and Scenery, Vol. 1, Num. 10, Serial No. 10, April 21, 1913
       A Trip Around the World with Dwight L. Elmendorf

Author: Dwight L. Elmendorf

Release Date: July 16, 2015 [EBook #49451]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MENTOR: SCOTLAND ***




Produced by Juliet Sutherland and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                     THE MENTOR 1913.04.21, No. 10,
                                Scotland




                            LEARN ONE THING
                               EVERY DAY

                   APRIL 21 1913      SERIAL NO. 10

                                  THE
                                MENTOR

                               SCOTLAND

                         THE LAND OF SONG AND
                                SCENERY

                     A Trip Around the World with
                          DWIGHT L. ELMENDORF

                    DEPARTMENT OF          VOLUME 1
                    TRAVEL                NUMBER 10

                         FIFTEEN CENTS A COPY




THE MENTOR ASSOCIATION

ESTABLISHED FOR THE DEVELOPMENT OF A POPULAR INTEREST IN ART,
LITERATURE, SCIENCE, HISTORY, NATURE, AND TRAVEL

=CONTRIBUTORS=--PROF. JOHN C. VAN DYKE, HAMILTON W. MABIE, PROF. ALBERT
BUSHNELL HART, REAR ADMIRAL ROBERT E. PEARY, WILLIAM T. HORNADAY,
DWIGHT L. ELMENDORF, HENRY T. FINCK, WILLIAM WINTER, ESTHER SINGLETON,
PROF. G. W. BOTSFORD, IDA M. TARBELL, GUSTAV KOBBÉ, DEAN C. WORCESTER,
JOHN K. MUMFORD, W. J. HOLLAND, LORADO TAFT, KENYON COX, E. H. FORBUSH,
H. E. KREHBIEL, SAMUEL ISHAM, BURGES JOHNSON, STEPHEN BONSAL, JAMES
HUNEKER, W. J. HENDERSON, AND OTHERS.

THE PLAN OF THE ASSOCIATION

The purpose of The Mentor Association is to give its members, in an
interesting and attractive way the information in various fields of
knowledge which everybody wants and ought to have. The information is
imparted by interesting reading matter, prepared under the direction of
leading authorities, and by beautiful pictures, reproduced by the most
highly perfected modern processes. The object of The Mentor Association
is to enable people to acquire useful knowledge without effort, so that
they may come easily and agreeably to know the world’s great men and
women, the great achievements and the permanently interesting things in
art, literature, science, history, nature and travel.

The purpose of the Association is carried out by means of simple
readable text and beautiful illustrations in The Mentor.

The annual subscription is Three Dollars, covering The Mentor Course,
which comprises twenty-four numbers of The Mentor in one year.

THE MENTOR IS PUBLISHED TWICE A MONTH

SUBSCRIPTION, THREE DOLLARS A YEAR. FOREIGN POSTAGE 75 CENTS EXTRA.
CANADIAN POSTAGE 50 CENTS EXTRA. SINGLE COPIES FIFTEEN CENTS.
PRESIDENT, THOMAS H. BECK; VICE-PRESIDENT, WALTER P. TEN EYCK;
SECRETARY, W. D. MOFFAT; TREASURER, ROBERT M. DONALDSON; ASST.
TREASURER AND ASST. SECRETARY, J.S. CAMPBELL

_Copyright, 1913, by The Mentor Association, Inc.

Entered as second-class matter March 10, 1913, at the post office at
New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879._




[Illustration: ROBERT BURNS’ COTTAGE, SCOTLAND]




_SCOTLAND_

_Robert Burns’ Cottage_

ONE


Few poets singing in dialect become world famous. This is true for the
simple reason that a dialect poet is likely to be local--to write of
local things--to avoid the universal. But Robert Burns--“poor Burns,”
as we think of him--was the exception. Who does not know “Auld Lang
Syne” and all that it means? Or who has not said to himself in his own
way, “A man’s a man for a’ that?”

Robert Burns could not help but be a poet of the people--the “peasant
poet.” He was born close to the soil of Scotland. On January 25, 1759,
he opened his eyes in a small cottage about two miles from Ayr, in
Scotland. His father was only a small farmer, and Robert got very
little education, but lots of hard work.

However, he managed to learn to read, and used to carry his books into
the fields with him to snatch a few moments’ reading during the day. At
meal times he sat with a spoon in one hand and a book in the other. He
liked best the ballads of Scotland--the old songs of the minstrels.

But in 1781 he went to Irvine to learn the trade of a flax-dresser.
And it was here that he indulged two habits that clung to him all the
rest of his life--drinking and falling in love. For the poet was a boon
companion at a feast and a great heartbreaker--but his own heart was
broken also many times.

His fortunes fell very low in 1786, and he intended to sail for the
West Indies, there to try to better them. But his first volume of
poetry proved to be such a great success that he did not go. His
poems took the people by storm. Everyone read them. He was invited to
Edinburgh, where he became the lion of the hour.

But all this did not bring him in much money. Finally, in 1789 he got
a position as excise officer. But as the years went on, and he grew
wilder and wilder in his dissipations, friends drew away from him. His
only companions were those of the lowest classes.

At last, on July 4, 1796, he knew that he was dying. He wrote on the
twelfth to his cousin for a loan of fifty dollars, to save him from
passing his last days in jail. He died on the twenty-first of July,
1796.

The Burns Cottage, near Ayr is reverently preserved as a memorial to
the poet. Here is the little room where he was born, and here are to
be found many mementos associated with his life. This cot, built of
clay by Burns’ father, is a shrine for those who love the memory of the
“peasant poet.”

  PREPARED BY THE EDITORIAL STAFF OF THE MENTOR ASSOCIATION
  ILLUSTRATION FOR THE MENTOR, VOL. 1, No. 10, SERIAL No. 10
  COPYRIGHT, 1913, BY THE MENTOR ASSOCIATION, INC.




[Illustration: ELLENS ISLE, SCOTLAND]




_SCOTLAND_

_Ellens Isle_

TWO


A fierce looking man who had lost his way stood on a beach of
snow-white pebbles near a beautiful little glassy lake and blew a
loud blast on the bugle which he held in his left hand. And almost
immediately he dodged into a nearby thicket of bushes and stood there
peering forth at a little skiff that came gliding toward the shore from
underneath a gnarled oak tree overhanging the water. The only occupant
of the boat was a beautiful young girl, who, after guiding it to a safe
landing on the silvery strand, stepped gracefully out on the pebbles.

This was James Fitzjames’ first sight of Ellen, the heroine of Sir
Walter Scott’s poem, “The Lady of the Lake,” which has immortalized
for all time Loch Katrine in the Trossachs, Scotland. There in the
lake sleeps Ellens Isle, the pretty little island on which the girl
lived--and last secret fastness of her fierce clan.

In the poem Fitzjames has become separated from his companions, and his
bugle call is to summon them to his side from the hunt on which they
are engaged. But before they come Fitzjames makes the acquaintance of
the girl and goes to Ellens Isle with her--and that’s the beginning of
the romance that has made Scott’s poem famous.

All the country round about Loch Katrine has been made famous by Scott.
Almost every spot has been the scene of one or more incidents in his
novels. High above Callander rise Uamh Var, where the stag was started
at the beginning of “The Lady of the Lake,” and Ben Crackie, with the
wild Bracklin Fall, within the roar of whose waters the seer of Clan
Alpine wrapped himself in the white bull’s hide to dream his dream.
Northward from Callander lies the beautiful Pass of Seny, up which
Duncraggan’s heir rushed with the Fiery Cross, to thrust it, at the
door of the little kirk of St. Bride, into the hands of the new-wed
Norman, heir of Armandave. And westward from Callander lie Coilantogle
Ford, where James Fitzjames fought Roderick Dhu; Lanrick Mead, the
fierce clan’s muster-place; and Duncraggan, scene of the Highland
funeral.

The popularity of “The Lady of the Lake” has brought many visitors to
Loch Katrine. This beautiful region is visited by hundreds of tourists
each year.

  PREPARED BY THE EDITORIAL STAFF OF THE MENTOR ASSOCIATION
  ILLUSTRATION FOR THE MENTOR, VOL. 1, No. 10, SERIAL No. 10
  COPYRIGHT, 1913, BY THE MENTOR ASSOCIATION, INC.




[Illustration: MELROSE ABBEY, SCOTLAND]




_SCOTLAND_

_Melrose Abbey_

THREE


Among the ruins of Melrose Abbey, ivy covered and deserted, lies buried
the heart of Scotland’s greatest king--Robert Bruce. Why is it there,
so far away from his grave at Dunfermline? Bannockburn was the greatest
achievement of Bruce’s life. This decisive battle was fought on June
24, 1314. Robert Bruce was born in 1274, at a time when Scotland was
struggling fiercely to throw off the yoke of England under Edward I.
Bruce grew up with the love of freedom strongly implanted in his heart.
He was a natural leader.

Finally, his chance came. On March 27, 1306, he had himself crowned
king of Scotland; but he was as yet a king without a kingdom. He
gathered his supporters together and overran Scotland until only
Berwick, Stirling, and Bothwell remained to the English. Edward I had
died, and Edward II, a weak and unstable man, was on the British throne.

But even this weakling now saw that unless a strong blow was struck
Scotland would be lost. He assembled his army and advanced on Bruce.
And then Bruce, by a wonderful exhibition of strategy, rapidity of
movement, and personal bravery, so decisively defeated him that the
complete rout of the English determined the independence of Scotland
and confirmed the title of Bruce.

After peace had been made the new king of Scotland proved himself as
able a lawmaker as he was a warrior. But he did not live many years to
enjoy his triumph. On June 7, 1329, he died of leprosy, contracted in
the hardships of earlier life, and was buried at Dunfermline.

Now comes the story of the “Heart of Bruce.” During his life he made
a vow to visit the Holy Sepulcher. But he could not do this; so he
begged Douglas to carry his heart there after his death. But the brave
Douglas, on the way to the Holy Land stopped off in Spain to help the
Spaniards against the Moors and was killed. However, the box containing
Bruce’s heart was recovered by Sir William Keith, and at last was
brought back to Scotland and found a resting place in Melrose Abbey.

Melrose Abbey is eight hundred years old, and, though battered both by
time and the assaults of many hostile armies, is still famous for its
architecture. It is situated on the River Tweed, near the little town
of Melrose.

Sir Walter Scott has immortalized this famous old ruin forever, when in
“The Lay of the Last Minstrel” he describes the visit to Melrose Abbey
of William of Deloraine, who had come to steal from the hand of the
dead magician, Michael Scott, his book of magic.

How beautiful the abbey may have been we can only guess; but it is
still picturesque, though the windows, once filled with wonderful
stained glass, are now bare and desolate, and the only incense on its
ruined altar is the breath of the wild rose.

  PREPARED BY THE EDITORIAL STAFF OF THE MENTOR ASSOCIATION
  ILLUSTRATION FOR THE MENTOR, VOL. 1, No. 10, SERIAL No. 10
  COPYRIGHT, 1913, BY THE MENTOR ASSOCIATION, INC.




[Illustration: ABBOTSFORD, SCOTLAND]




_SCOTLAND_

_Abbotsford_

FOUR


A man who at the age of fifty-five resolves to pay off a bankruptcy
debt of six hundred thousand dollars must justly be regarded as a hero.
Not many men, weakened in health and used to all the comforts, would
attempt to do this--especially when the debt was incurred through no
fault of their own, and when the law does not force them to pay. Yet
that is what Sir Walter Scott--the “Wizard of the North”--did, and so
fiercely did he work at his writing--twelve, fourteen, and sixteen
hours a day--that at his death six years later every penny of that
colossal and heartbreaking debt had been paid.

The story of Abbotsford, the home of the great poet and novelist, of
which he dreamed for years, and which he planned and built himself, is
a drama, a tragedy itself. No sooner was the great house finished and
the dream of his life complete than the crash of tremendous ruin fell
on Scott.

It was on a bleak winter morning in 1826 that a friend called at
Abbotsford and found the novelist terribly agitated.

“My friend,” said Sir Walter to him, “give me your hand; mine is that
of a beggar.”

The publishing house with which he had been connected had failed,
and Scott took upon himself the terrible burden of satisfying its
creditors. It was an apparently hopeless task for a writer, and one in
such a frail state of health as Scott, to accomplish. But where others
would have yielded to Fate, he stood up to fight it, and though the
effort cost him his life he succeeded, and may truly be called the most
heroic literary figure in the world.

Walter Scott was born at Edinburgh on August 15, 1771. His father
wanted him to follow his own profession, that of a lawyer; but the boy
wished to write. He wrote poetry at first; but according to the story
turned to prose romance when he found that Lord Byron excelled him as a
poet. It was in 1814 that a novel--“Waverley”--by an anonymous author,
appeared. Its popularity swept like wild fire all over England. Book
after book, all of the same excellence, was published. The secret of
authorship was jealously kept by Scott--for what reason many guesses
have been made--but at last his name was definitely connected with this
great series--the “Waverley Novels.”

He prospered brilliantly for eleven years. And then came the crash of
ruin. Scott put his shoulder to the wheel. His wife died soon after the
struggle began; but, though sick at heart, he toiled on indomitably.
Success was his in the end; but the struggle killed him.

It was on the twenty-first of September, 1832, that Sir Walter Scott
died.

  PREPARED BY THE EDITORIAL STAFF OF THE MENTOR ASSOCIATION
  ILLUSTRATION FOR THE MENTOR, VOL. 1, No. 10, SERIAL No. 10
  COPYRIGHT, 1913, BY THE MENTOR ASSOCIATION, INC.




[Illustration: STIRLING CASTLE, SCOTLAND]




_SCOTLAND_

_Stirling Castle_

FIVE


One Sunday morning in 1543 a pretty, helpless little girl baby less
than a year old was seated on a throne in the spacious chapel of
Stirling Castle in Scotland, surrounded by fierce, mailed men. A
cardinal held a crown over her head; the tiny fingers were clasped for
a moment about a scepter; a huge, unwieldy sword was buckled round the
little waist; and a noble spoke the words that created Mary Stuart
queen of Scotland. Forty-four years later the stroke of a sword in
the headsman’s hands ended the life of this queen--one of the most
beautiful and tragic figures in all history.

Besides the coronation of Mary Queen of Scots, Stirling Castle has seen
many historic events. This old stronghold is situated on the Firth of
Forth, some thirty-five miles above Edinburgh. It stands on a hill high
above the town of Stirling. No one knows exactly how long ago it was
built; but it is very, very old.

Away back in the time of the Romans these invaders of Britain had a
station in the town of Stirling. Alexander II, king of Scotland, gave
the town its first charter in 1226, and he made Stirling Castle the
royal residence. During the wars of Scottish Independence the castle
was besieged many times. Edward I of England captured it in 1304. For
ten years after that it was held by the English; but Robert Bruce
besieged it fiercely in 1314. Edward II, who was king of England at
that time, was a weak ruler, and he knew that if the Scots captured
Stirling Castle they would probably win their freedom. So he gathered
an army and marched north. But he was so badly beaten by Bruce at the
battle of Bannockburn that the Scots won their independence, and Bruce
became their king. On the esplanade before Stirling Castle stands a
statue of this great man.

The tragic story of the execution of Mary Stuart, who was crowned at
Stirling, is one of the most pathetic episodes in history. Condemned
on an unjust charge, she was sentenced to death by Elizabeth, queen of
England. The final scene in the life of the beautiful queen of Scotland
took place in Fotheringay Castle in England. As Mary approached the
block, the melancholy sweetness of her beauty touched every heart. Even
her executioners knelt and begged her to forgive them for the sad duty
that they were forced to perform.

“I forgive you with all my heart,” sadly replied Mary.

She knelt down and laid her head upon the block amid a tense silence,
broken only by an occasional sob. A moment later the chief executioner
held up her head, exclaiming, “So perish all the enemies of Queen
Elizabeth.”

  PREPARED BY THE EDITORIAL STAFF OF THE MENTOR ASSOCIATION
  ILLUSTRATION FOR THE MENTOR, VOL. 1, No. 10, SERIAL No. 10
  COPYRIGHT, 1913, BY THE MENTOR ASSOCIATION, INC.




[Illustration: FINGALS CAVE, SCOTLAND]




_SCOTLAND_

_Fingals Cave_

SIX


Fingals Cave is a part of the Scotland end of the Giants Causeway,
which was supposed to have once led from Ireland to the Isle of Staffa.
They say that Fin MacCoul, or Fingal, as he is called, built the Giants
Causeway. Fingal was an Irish giant--the champion hero of all the
Emerald Isle. He wanted to fight Bennandonner, another giant, so he
built the great causeway from Scotland to Ireland. It is written that
Fingal won. In tradition he is the hero of both Ireland and Scotland.

Fingals Cave is the most famous of the many natural caverns on the
Isle of Staffa, one of the western islands of Scotland. This island is
three-quarters of a mile long, and about one-third of a mile wide. No
one lives there; but every weekday during the summer a steamer takes
tourists over to see the famous cave.

There are other caverns on Staffa; but Fingals Cave is the best known.
Its columns are of basalt, and are six sided in shape. These columns
are so regular that it seems hardly possible that the force of the
waves alone could have formed them. But that is the fact; although
not many years ago some one rushed into print to say that the ancient
inhabitants of Scotland and the islands nearby had dug out all these
caverns themselves. He even gave a lecture in New York City (charging
a dollar a seat, the proceeds to go toward building a pedestal for the
Statue of Liberty) to give his theories to the world. Unfortunately for
him he did not know very much about geology, and could not prove his
theories to be correct.

It was also stated by another theorist that the columns of the Giants
Causeway were petrified growths of bamboo; but this idea too had only a
short life.

Fingals Cave was discovered in 1772 by Sir Joseph Banks, who visited
Staffa on his expedition to Iceland. The cave is on the southern face
of the island. It is 66 feet high and at the entrance 42 feet broad. It
runs back into the land a distance of 227 feet, and is only 2 feet wide
at the end.

Seals and sea birds haunt the cave, and the murmur of the sea gave it
the name in Gaelic of “The Cave of Music.” But when the weather is
stormy the cave roars in anger. This is due to the air within being
compressed by the waves, and then rushing out.

  PREPARED BY THE EDITORIAL STAFF OF THE MENTOR ASSOCIATION
  ILLUSTRATION FOR THE MENTOR, VOL. 1, No. 10, SERIAL No. 10
  COPYRIGHT, 1913, BY THE MENTOR ASSOCIATION, INC.




                              THE MENTOR

                “A Wise and Faithful Guide and Friend”

                VOL. 1      APRIL 21, 1913      NO. 10




SCOTLAND

_THE LAND OF SONG AND SCENERY_

_A TRIP AROUND THE WORLD_

_With DWIGHT L. ELMENDORF
Lecturer and Traveler_

  ROBERT BURNS COTTAGE
  ABBOTSFORD
  ELLENS ISLE
  STIRLING CASTLE
  MELROSE ABBEY
  FINGALS CAVE


In its contour and in its varied natural features Scotland is unique.
It seems, indeed, as if Nature had shaped the land in a spirit of
coquetry with the sea.

Though limited in territory, Scotland has a shore line thousands of
miles in extent. Her coast is a series of inlets, firths, and sounds,
and she has added to the irregularity of her shores by setting out
innumerable beautiful islands that rear their rocky heads in the
western sea. No one knows the full beauty of Scotland who has not
visited the islands. Their picturesque and varied attractions pronounce
them the true and natural offspring of the parent land.

Scotland has long been called the land of scenery and of song. The two
are intimately associated. The scenery of Scotland has inspired many of
her songs, and the songs have paid tribute in return by celebrating the
beauty of the scenery in affectionate and eloquent phrase. The songs
of Scotland breathe the life of the people and of the nation in a way
that has won the sympathetic interest of the world. The prevailing note
in Scottish song and literature is romance. The very name of Scotland
is fragrant with romance. Its scenery is rich in romantic beauty and
romantic associations, and its songs give eloquent expression to both.

[Illustration: ROBERT BURNS]

And so the traveler in Scotland finds the charm of her scenery happily
voiced for him, and as he wanders from one spot to another he can
recall the lines that enhance its beauty. It may be “The Banks and
Braes o’ Bonnie Doon” or “Within a Mile of Edinboro’ Town.” Wherever he
goes he may enjoy the scenery in companionship with the spirit of the
poet who sang its praises.

To most of us Scotland means Wallace and Robert Bruce in heroic
chivalry, and Walter Scott and Robert Burns in romance and in song.
Most of the scenes and places that interest the traveler are associated
with one or another of these four names.


THE HOME OF BURNS

The name of Robert Burns has a hold upon the people of Scotland and on
those who visit there such as finds no parallel in any other country.
This makes a visit to the small town of Ayr an incident of prime
interest to the tourist. The Robert Burns Cottage is situated about two
miles from the town, and it is kept with reverent care as a memorial.
The building itself, low-roofed and humble, with its Burns mementos, is
a veritable shrine for lovers of the poet.

The chief feature of the quaint old house is the little, low-ceilinged
room in which Burns was born in 1759. You will be glad to linger there
awhile. The impressions of the room will remain in your memory for all
time. As you note the humble simplicity of the scene you will get close
to Burns, and you will feel the full meaning and appeal of his lines:

    “Gie me a spark of Nature’s fire!
    That’s a’ the learning I desire.
    Then, tho’ I drudge thro’ dub an’ mire
      At plow or cart,
    My muse--tho’ hamely in attire--
      May touch the heart!”

The whole country roundabout is full of Burns associations. A short
distance off is Auld Alloway Kirk, where Burns’ father is buried, and
where Tam o’ Shanter, overcome by the spirits that he imbibed too
freely, was assailed and pursued by spirits ghostly. A short distance
beyond the church are two bridges over the Doon, the old bridge being
celebrated as the one over which Tam o’ Shanter made his escape from
the evil spirits. In the garden near the bridges stands the formal but
impressive Burns Monument.

[Illustration: AULD BRIG O’ DOON

_The old bridge at Ayr, celebrated in Burns’ lines._]

Between that humble cottage down the road toward Ayr, and the Greek
monument in the garden, is told the story of a simple, sweet, singing
bard, whose lines so completely filled the hearts of his fellowmen that
the very scenes of which he sang have become endeared to all humanity.


THE WALTER SCOTT COUNTRY

Between Loch Achray and Loch Katrine lies the Trossachs, beautiful in
winding wooded roads and lake and mountain views--and famed chiefly for
being Walter Scott’s own land of romance. It has often been said that
one who has read Scott’s novels needs no guidebook in the Trossachs.
Drive through this charming valley to Loch Katrine, a beautiful lake
nearly ten miles long. From the east end steep cliffs ascend from the
water’s edge, and there, looking through the brilliant foliage on
the bank, you can see the pretty little _Ellens Isle_, made immortal
in Walter Scott’s poem, “Lady of the Lake.” This is one of the most
“pictured” spots in Scotland. You will find it in any illustrated
volume of Scott’s poems. You will find it in color and in gravure,
in large prints and on postcards, wherever you turn. It is the very
heart of the Trossachs, and one of the most inviting spots in the
British Isles--as attractive in its natural beauty as in the romantic
associations that cast their spell about it.

[Illustration: THE BURNS MEMORIAL

_Standing on a hillside park near the town of Ayr. In a room within
the monument are a number of Burns relics, together with his bust and
portrait._]


MELROSE ABBEY

Hallowed by eight hundred years of history and immortalized by Walter
Scott, Melrose Abbey stands today the most interesting, as well as the
most beautiful, ruin in Scotland. It is the drawing attraction of the
little town of Melrose, situated on the Tweed. Enticed by the magic of
Scott’s lines, thousands visit the Abbey every year.

    “If thou wouldst view fair Melrose aright,
    Go visit it by the pale moonlight.”

So firmly have these verses stamped themselves on the hearts of readers
all over the world that tourists feel that their visit is not complete
unless they have seen the Abbey “by pale moonlight.” In response to
this desire the Abbey is opened on moonlight nights for special visits.

[Illustration: SIR WALTER SCOTT]

Melrose Abbey was founded by David the First, in the twelfth century.
After being destroyed by Edward the Second, it was rebuilt by Robert
Bruce in the fourteenth century. It was again destroyed and rebuilt in
the following century. During the many years of its history it suffered
dreadfully from the ravages of war. Armies of invasion from England
ruthlessly assaulted its sacred precincts and destroyed its beautiful
features. In spite of that, after being reconstructed several times,
it holds its place as a beautiful example of architecture and a most
picturesque ruin.

[Illustration: BRIG O’TURK, IN THE TROSSACHS]


THE HOME OF SCOTT

About three miles from Melrose, on the right bank of the Tweed, stands
Abbotsford, a name most dear to readers of the Waverley novels. There
the “Wizard of the North,” as he was called, wrote his way into fame
and fortune; there he lived when his fortune was swept away with that
of his publisher; and there in his old age he settled himself grimly to
repay debts amounting to six hundred thousand dollars--all by the work
of his pen. He finished this stupendous task in about six years. He
discharged his debts honorably; but he gave his lifeblood to the task.
Scarcely had he come clear of his debts when his pen fell from his
hand, and, in the bright, sunny dining room of Abbotsford, he dropped
wearily to sleep, with the waters of his beloved Tweed murmuring
musically in his ears. He had kept faith with his creditors; he had
paid the last penny; he had secured his home for his children--and his
work was done.

[Illustration: DRYBURGH ABBEY

_Showing the location of Sir Walter Scott’s tomb._]

Attended by a funeral procession more than a mile in length, including
the great that came from distant parts to do him honor, and the humble
peasant neighbors that knew and loved him, Sir Walter Scott’s body was
borne reverently to Dryburgh Abbey, and in that beautiful ruin, a most
appropriate spot, he now lies at rest.


THE CASTLES OF SCOTLAND

Two of the most impressive and picturesque castles of the world are in
Scotland,--Stirling Castle and Edinburgh Castle.

Stirling Castle is situated on the Firth of Forth about thirty-five
miles above Edinburgh, and it was for years the favorite residence
of Scottish sovereigns. It played a prominent part in the history of
Scotland, and is intimately associated with the name of Robert Bruce,
who recaptured the castle from Edward the Second of England, in the
fourteenth century, after the battle of Bannockburn.

The castle, like that of Edinburgh, is situated on a lofty height. On
the esplanade before it stands a statue of Robert Bruce. The view from
all sides is beautiful, and commands, on the west, a fair range of
mountains, including Ben Lomond and Ben Venue, while on the south the
battlefield of Bannockburn stretches away before the eye.

[Illustration: EDINBURGH CASTLE

_One of the most beautiful and impressive castles in Great Britain._]

Edinburgh Castle, an ancient seat of Scottish kings, has a most
magnificent situation on a rocky height above the city. On three sides
the mountain on which it stands drops almost sheer. On the east it
slopes gradually off toward Holyrood.


THE HOME OF MARY, QUEEN OF SCOTS

There at Holyrood we find the scene of one of Scotland’s most affecting
dramas,--the tragedy of Mary, Queen of Scots. Holyrood Castle, which
was the unfortunate queen’s home for many years, is part ruin and part
in good repair and occupied. It is there that the visitor can see the
bedroom of the fair young Scottish queen, and there also the spot where
her unfortunate minstrel and counselor, Rizzio, was murdered. Holyrood
is intimately associated with the memories of Mary, Queen of Scots, and
all who have followed with interest her sad story and want to feel an
impression of her actual presence should spend a day in and about the
castle.

[Illustration: HOLYROOD CASTLE

_Associated with the most dramatic years in the life of the unfortunate
Mary, Queen of Scots._]

The modern Scottish home of British royalty is Balmoral, situated on
an estate of ten thousand acres about fifty miles from Aberdeen. This
beautiful palace was purchased by the Crown in 1852 from the Earl of
Fife for one hundred and fifty thousand dollars. It was for years the
favorite country home of Queen Victoria, and is now said to be the most
cherished residence of British royalty.


THE SCOTTISH ISLES

Months could be profitably spent in touring through the Isles of
Scotland, and they would be months of unalloyed delight. Two small
islands should be visited even in the course of the briefest Scottish
tour, the Island of Iona, where Saint Columba, the missionary, landed
from Ireland in 563, to begin his missionary work in Scotland, and
on which are to be found the tombs of ancient Scottish, Irish, and
Norwegian kings.

For over a thousand years the Island of Iona was the chosen “God’s
Acre” for the great chieftains. The land was held sacred on account of
Columba, and it was regarded as the securest spot on earth for mortal
remains to rest in. Therefore the bodies of kings were taken there even
from distant points in Ireland and in Norway, and for centuries Iona
was the Mecca of religious pilgrims who went there to pray and to pay
reverent tribute to the tombs of the great.

[Illustration: BEDROOM OF MARY, QUEEN OF SCOTS

_Visited by many every year, this is the most interesting spot in
Holyrood Castle._]


FINGALS CAVE

Historic interest will draw you to Iona; the interest of wild nature
will attract you to Staffa. On the Isle of Staffa is Fingals Cave, one
of Nature’s curiosities, extraordinary in its formation and offering
features of a wonder-compelling kind. The island is a rounded tableland
which has been thrust up through the sea by volcanic action. It is
about two miles in circumference, and rises nearly 150 feet above the
surface of the ocean. The cave, which is crowned by a high arch of
land, rises sixty feet above the sea, and through its interior length
it varies from twenty to forty feet in width. Staffa has many caves;
but the extraordinary size and character of Fingals Cave centers the
interest of all visitors there. It is impossible in rough weather to
enter the cave by boat. The method of visiting is to land some distance
away and enter by a protected footpath. Once inside, the effect of
surging, roaring waves overarched by echoing walls of basalt is most
impressive. The basaltic columns--similar in formation to those of
the Giants Causeway, across the sea on the coast of Ireland--rear
themselves in parallel lines like a formidable palisade constructed for
the support and protection of the cave.

[Illustration: BALMORAL CASTLE

_The highland home of British royalty--Queen Victoria’s favorite summer
residence. Purchased by the Crown from the Duke of Fife._]

We have visited but a few of the many places renowned for beauty and
romance in the land of the heather. We have not seen Ben Nevis and the
ruins of Inverlochy Castle; nor Swan Island in Loch Lomond; nor yet
Lochleven Castle with its thrilling tradition of Queen Mary’s escape.

    “No warden’s fire shall e’er again
      Illume Lochleven’s bosom fair;
    No clarion shrill of armed men
      The breeze across the lake shall bear;
    But while remains a stone of thine,
      It shall be linked to royal fame,--
    For here the Rose of Stuart’s line
      Hath left the fragrance of her name.”

And while we have pointed out the unique attractions of the Scottish
Isles, we have said nothing of the wild, romantic beauty of the
Highlands. The picturesque old ruin of Linlithgow Castle, Bothwell
Castle, Loch Ness, the noble Northern peaks and their surroundings--all
have been celebrated in glowing prose and verse, and around them
clusters history and romance enough to make many volumes.

It is not easy to sum up the beauties of Scotland within the space of
a few pages. It is a land where Nature and Romance go hand in hand,
Nature affording a background of rare beauty, while Romance invests it
with vital human interest. Picture an ideal tour in which each day is
filled with profit and pleasure, and all Nature’s resources in land,
sea, and sky combine to delight you and draw you on--then call that
tour a “Summer in Scotland.”

[Illustration: TOMBS OF THE KINGS

_A part of the historic old graveyard on Iona Isle. Among forty kings
of Scotland buried here are King Duncan and Macbeth, made famous by
Shakespeare._]




_SUPPLEMENTARY READING_


[Illustration]

  The Land of Heather                _Clifton Johnson_
  Scotland of Today      _T. F. Henderson and F. Watt_
  Tales of a Grandfather            _Sir Walter Scott_
  Scotland, Historic and Romantic     _M. H. Lansdale_
  History of Scotland                  _P. Hume Brown_
  A Literary History of Scotland        _J. H. Miller_

[Illustration]

_QUESTIONS ANSWERED_

Anyone desiring further information concerning this subject can obtain
it by writing to

=_The Mentor Association 222 Fourth Avenue, New York City_=




Let Your Friends Share the Privilege of Membership in The Mentor
Association


The Course for One Year Provides:

1--A growing library of the world’s knowledge--twenty-four numbers a
year.

2--A beautiful art collection for the home--one hundred and forty-four
art prints in sepia gravure and color.

3--One hundred and forty-four crisp monographs--one to accompany each
Mentor Gravure.

4--A reading course throughout the year.

5--An education for all the family, under the direction of the foremost
educators in this country--in art, literature, science, history,
nature, and travel.

Send the names of three friends whom you wish to nominate for
membership, and to whom you would like to have us send presentation
copies of The Mentor.




THE MENTOR


The Mentor Service

This service covers the needs of those who want to gain knowledge by an
easy and agreeable method.

Send for our booklet descriptive of The Mentor Club Service. It
presents many varied Mentor courses specially planned for the use of
reading clubs.

The Mentor Association will supply to its members supplementary reading
courses dealing with any or all of the subjects in The Mentor Courses.
These courses of reading are prepared under the direction of the
Advisory Board of The Mentor--all of them prominent educators.

The Mentor Association will also secure books for members, supplying
them postpaid at publishers’ prices.

The Mentor Inquiry Department gives to its members a full and
intelligent service in answering inquiries concerning books, reading,
and all matters of general information having a bearing on The Mentor
Courses.

MANY READERS HAVE COME TO KNOW THE VALUE OF THE MENTOR SERVICE. IN THE
FULLEST SENSE IT SUPPLEMENTS AND ROUNDS OUT THE PLAN OF THE MENTOR. ALL
MEMBERS OF THE ASSOCIATION ARE INVITED TO TAKE ADVANTAGE OF THIS SERVICE

THE MENTOR BINDER

Every page of The Mentor, cover included, contains matter that readers
want to keep. The Mentor Association is now supplying to its members
a binder which holds twelve or thirteen Mentors and has proved
satisfactory in every way. This binder has been arranged so as to
hold The Mentor complete and it has tapes to which the pictures are
attached, so that they swing freely in their place and the pictures can
be enjoyed as well as the text on the back.

The price of these binders is One Dollar each.

MAKE THE SPARE MOMENT COUNT





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Mentor: Scotland, The Land of Song
and Scenery, Vol. 1, Num. 10, Serial N, by Dwight L. Elmendorf

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MENTOR: SCOTLAND ***

***** This file should be named 49451-0.txt or 49451-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/9/4/5/49451/

Produced by Juliet Sutherland and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

